---
Title: EEE 6505 Nanophotonics and Plasmonics (April 2021)
Placing: 20
Icon: book
publishDate: '2021-04-01T00:00:00Z' 
---

## Welcome

Welcome to the course on EEE 6405 Nanophotonics and Plasmonics. We are taking classes through Microsoft Teams and all communications for this course will be done through the class team of the course. **This webpage will not be updated, and kept just for prospective students to have an idea about the course.**  

##Announcement
Here is a link to the first class:

Time: Jul 24, 2021 05:30 PM Astana, Dhaka

[https://teams.microsoft.com/l/meetup-join/19%3ae6f96271ddf84bbe9e43207d01dbb0af%40thread.tacv2/1626767626948?context=%7b%22Tid%22%3a%2279a50cb4-fa04-495b-9bd1-7860bc00fe6a%22%2c%22Oid%22%3a%220281a1bb-b10b-46fd-8a81-7f690ee76ea5%22%7d](https://teams.microsoft.com/l/meetup-join/19%3ae6f96271ddf84bbe9e43207d01dbb0af%40thread.tacv2/1626767626948?context=%7b%22Tid%22%3a%2279a50cb4-fa04-495b-9bd1-7860bc00fe6a%22%2c%22Oid%22%3a%220281a1bb-b10b-46fd-8a81-7f690ee76ea5%22%7d)


##Background

I completed my PhD from Purdue University in Summer of 2019. I had acquired knowledge on modelling, fabricating and characterizing plasmonic metasurfaces for my PhD work, creating the thinnest color hologram with epitaxial silver based metasurface at the time of publication. I am really grateful to my supervisor Prof. Alexandra Boltasseva for introducing me to the area, and my mentor, Prof. Vladimir Shalaev for introducing me to the area of nanophotonics through his course in Purdue. This course is heavily influenced by Prof. Shalaev's course [Nanophotonics and Metamaterial](https://nanohub.org/resources/19272) (freely available on Nanohub), which I attended as a first year graduate student in Purdue. 

This course would introduce graduate students to the field of Nanophotonics and its great wonders. We will talk about light-matter interaction in the nanoscale, how to make devices that goes beyond the diffraction limit, their theory, application and design. 

As a graduate level course, we would focus on active learning in the course, where you will participate in group projects and individual assignments to grasp the concepts and learn about the vast field. The course will be really useful if you are thinking about pursuing research in Nanophotonics, or want to know more about the field.  

##Syllabus
Interaction of light with material; wave equation in matter from Maxwell’s equations; Dielectric properties of insulators, semiconductors and metals; Interaction of light with microstructures and nanostructures; Optical properties of metal-dielectric composites; Photonic Crystals: Electromagnetic effects in periodic media; One-, two- and three-dimensional photonic crystals; Applications of photonic crystals: omni-directional reflection, light localization, photonic crystal fibers; Surface Plasmons: Surface plasmon polariton at single interface, multilayer system, localized surface plasmons; Excitation of surface plasmon polariton; Prism coupling, grating coupling; Application of surface plasmons; Sub-wavelength waveguides, plasmonic photovoltaics, plasmonic bio-sensors; Metamaterials: Electric metamaterials, magnetic metamaterials, negative index metamaterials, hyperbolic metamaterials.  

##Suggested Text Books 

* John D. Joannopoulos, Steven G. Johnson, Joshua N. Winn, and Robert D. Meade, _Photonic Crystals: Molding the Flow of Light second edition_ (Princeton Press, Freely available at [MIT website](http://ab-initio.mit.edu/book/)) 
* Stephen A Maier, _Plasmonics: Fundamentals and Applications_, [Springer](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/0-387-37825-1)
* Wenshan Cai, Vladimir Shalaev, _Optical Metamaterials: Fundamentals and Applications_, [Springer](https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9781441911506)

##Grading criteria
* **Midterm Presentation - 30%** (15 minutes presentation and Q A by the students on a relevant paper.)
* **Final Report - 40%** (For final report, you must do a comprehensive literature review on a particular topic relevant to the course and write a 1600 word review on it, with around 20-30 literature references. The goal is to combine multiple reports and to form a scientific review article on a particular focus (will discuss more on class))
* **Final Presentation - 10%** (15 minutes power point presentation highlighting your final report)
* **Final Examination - 20%** (Primarily focus on very basic concepts of the course and class discussions)

##Expectation
It would be expected that by the end of the course, you are able to do a comprehensive review on a particular topic of interest and are able to effectively communicate it orally. Regular participation in class discussion is strongly encouraged. Although, preparing the class presentations and report would demand time and effort, hopefully, by successful completion of the work, you would have a publishable work, and we can discuss after the end of the semester if we can compile and publish the work.

It is expected that students sign an honour pledge for the class and refrain from plagiarising. All reports would be checked with turnitin plagiarism checker and any plagiarized work would be dealt with a "F" grade in the entire course. 

##Lesson Plan 
(Subject to change based on student interest and class discussion) 

Week 01 – Introduction  

Week 02 – Light-Matter Interaction I 

Week 03 – Light-Matter Interaction II  

Week 04 – Photonic Crystals I 

Week 05 – Photonic Crystals II    

Week 06 – Discussion on Mid Term Presentation and Final Project 

Week 07 – Mid Term Presentation I  

Week 08 – Mid Term Presentation II  

Week 09 – Metal Optics I  

Week 10 – Metal Optics II 

Week 11 – Applications of Plasmonics 

Week 12 – Metamaterials  

Week 13 – Final Project - I 

Week 14 – Final Project - II 

## Midterm Presentation
Each student 10 minute presentation and 5 minutes question answer (points will be deducted for more than 12 minutes presentation)
Send me a video recording. Recording will be played and Q&A will be Live.
All students must attend the talks and participate in question answering.

Tentative grading rubric:
* Clarity of presentation: 20
* Demonstration that you understood the concept: 10
* Broad introduction of the topic: 10
* Explanation of results: 10
* Ability to face questions on the presentation: 10
* Active Participation in other presentations: 40
* Attending each presentation: 20

_Active participation: (you have to ask at least 4 questions in other presentations)_

## Final Project
For the final project of the course, you need to work in a group to write an original comprehensive review on any topic related to the course material. The review itself needs to be novel (no similar review should exist in literature).

###Scope of write up (including but not limited to):
1. Broad introduction of the field
2. Present Challenges
3. Fabrication methods
4. Breakthrough publiactions
5. Significant applications

### Instruction:
You need to form groups of * students. Each group will work on a particular scope. I will circulate a google form where you can give choice regarding the topics. Each group's broad topic should be unique.

Once you choose broad the topic, you need to do choose a special topic from it (as for example, from Nanophotonic systems a special topic can be imaging with metasurface). Your subtopic should be unique in a sense that there is no other review paper on the particular subtopic. Prepare a short outline of the paper (Introduction, Conclusion, which topics you will be covering etc) do a literature search on the topic and create an outline of your paper. Deadline to submit the outline is 2 weeks. 

After I okay the outline, you need to do further literature search and form your review on the topic. You are expected to write a publishable review on the topic.  Here are some resources that might help you in the process:

[Ten Simple Rules for Writing a Literature Review](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3715443/)

[Writing a review article](https://authorservices.taylorandfrancis.com/writing-a-review-article/)

[How To Write A Scientific Review Research Paper](https://www.forbes.com/sites/quora/2018/04/06/how-to-write-a-scientific-review-research-paper/#6d6694076c1b)

To improve writing skill, I highly recommend the Kristin Sainani's course from Stanford University, [Writing in the Science](https://www.coursera.org/learn/sciwrite/home/welcome). Complete week 1-5 of the course to improve your writing style. 

Originality of work: The paper that you write must be an original work of your own writing. The goal of the assignment is for you to learn writing a review. The papers will be checked with plagiarism checking software. Any similarity with already published work will result in a failure (F) in the assignment. Read this article on [avoiding plagiarism](https://www.plagiarism.org/article/preventing-plagiarism-when-writing)

If you choose to do so, I am willing to work on the final paper further with the possibility of publishing it in a peer-reviewed journal. This will be done after completion of the grading of the course to avoid any bias on grades.
