---
Title: BME 6103 (BME) Biophotonics  (October 2023)
Placing: 20
Icon: book
publishDate: '2023-10-01T00:00:00Z' 
---

## Welcome

Welcome to the course on BME 6103 Biophotonics. This course is offered to the Post Graduate Students of the Dept of BME, BUET. We are taking classes through Google Classroom and all communications for this course will be done through the class team of the course. **This webpage will not be updated, and kept just for prospective students to have an idea about the course.**  

## Class Schedule
Saturday 11am-1pm
Room BME 1108, ECE Building, BUET 

## Syllabus
### Course Content
Fundamentals of biophotonics: diverse applications, biophotonics spectral windows, light absorption, signal attenuation, emerging biomedical optical technologies, motivation for optical imaging;
Behavior of light in biological tissue: physics of light-matter interaction, absorption, scattering, polarization and fluorescence.
Optical fibers for biophotonic applications: overview of optical fibers, double-clad fibers, hard-clad silica fibers, biomedical applications;
Light sources: radiometry, arc lamps, light-emitting diodes, lasers for biophotonics, superluminescent diodes;
Optical detectors: the pin photodetector, avalanche photodiodes, multichannel detectors, photomultiplier tubes, optical couplers and circulators;
Optical probes and biosensors: optical fiber probe, optical sensors, interferometric sensors, photonic crystal fiber biosensors, surface plasmon resonance biosensor.
Spectroscopic methodologies: fluorescence spectroscopy, FRET/FLIM, fluorescence correlation spectroscopy, elastic scattering spectroscopy, diffuse correlation spectroscopy;
Application of biophotonic instrumentation.

### Textbooks
[Keiser] Biophotonics: Concepts to Applications 2nd Edition (2022) by Gerd Keiser
_Required to have a printed copy. Will be used in open book term final exam_

Reference book
[Prashad] Introduction to Biophotonics by Paras N. Prasad

[Tsia] Understanding Biophotonics: Fundamentals, Advances and Applications edited by Kevin K. Tsia


### Learning Outcomes (LO)
On successful completion of this course unit, students should be able to:
1. Understand the Nano systems and Devices.
2. Become Advances in Device Technology.
3. Analyze the Nano Electro Mechanical Systems.
4. Demonstrate the bio functionality on silicon.
### Teaching-learning Strategy
Class lectures, Case studies, Research papers review, Practical problem solution etc.

## Grading Policy
* Class Test- 20%  (3 class tests, all class tests counted.)
* Midterm Presentation - 30% (15 minutes presentation and Q A by the students on a relevant paper.)
* Final Examination - 50% (Primarily focus on very basic concepts of the course and class discussions)
